Dams on the Cedar, at Cedar Rapids:

The 5 in 1 dam
http://www.iowawhitewater.org/lhd/LHDcedarrapids.html

C Street Roller dam
http://www.iowawhitewater.org/lhd/LHDcedarrapidscst.html
http://www.panoramio.com/photo/88811391

Crandic bridge collapse
http://www.kcrg.com/news/local/19838619.html
http://www.arema.org/files/library/2010_Conference_Proceedings/Collapse_and_Reconstruction_of_the_CRANDIC_Cedar_River_Bridge.pdf



On Fri, Aug 30, 2013 at 4:18 PM, Eckstein, Barbara J <barbara-eckstein@uiowa.edu> wrote:
I'll put what I've found into a crude mock-up that I'll hope can be transferable to PWM.  For now I can say, I'm making progress and have some questions you, Jim, and Pete might be able to answer.  The details are below but in short the questions are these:
Was/is there a dam on the Cedar R?  I thought not but…
Is it the Crandic Bridge near City Hall that rolled/collapsed in 2008?

Mark, here's a question for you:
Do you know if, for educational purposes but public display in a museum, we can use on-line images of the 2008 flood?  I will write The Gazette and ask if they will donate a couple images if we need to.  Or figure out what UI people know the answer to this question.

Some of the details:
1961 New Orleans Times-Picayune articles about the flood in Cedar Rapids reference the 1929 Cedar Rapids flood and offer the explanation that the 1961 flood was not as bad because of flood preparation, namely cleaning out the river "below the dam."  Therefore, says the article, the water was 2 ft lower below the dam than above.  DAM?

In this same article there is a photograph of an interurban rail bridge used as a pedestrian bridge in 1961.  It was wired with explosives in case this measure was needed.  In the 1929 historical photos that we have—see attached—there is a railroad bridge loaded with coal cars-deliberately to stabilize it, I take it.
In an article in a publication called Industrial Distribution from August of 2008, there is an article about the dislocation of Iowa Midland Supply that was on 3rd St in Cedar Rapids.  For one thing this distribution business can be compared to the Williams and Hunting moulding distribution business. But in addition there is another reference to a rail bridge.  This time said bridge collapsed creating a dam that produced the flooding that inundated IA Midland Supply.  They were subsequently out of business for at least 3 months, it appears.  CAN YOU TELL FROM THE HISTORICAL PHOTO IF THIS IS THE SAME BRIDGE THAT WOULD HAVE COLLAPSED IN 2008?   

In the 2008 flood photos visible on line there is one straight on of city hall that can be set up in direct comparison to the 1929 image that we have (5055 above).  The stained glass window in city hall (ie, Veterans Memorial Building) is indeed a Grant Wood creation.  Conceived in 1927, it was completed and dedicated in March 1929.  Aside from deterioration over time, the window was not damaged until 2008.  SO.  THANK YOU FOR THIS LEAD AS IT MAKES A NICE COMPARISON TO THE 1929 FLOOD WHEN THE THEN NEW WINDOW WAS LEFT UNTOUCHED.  IT WAS REPAIRED AND REDEDICATED IN 2010. 

On the Cedar Rapids City website there is a "Map of Flood-Impacted Areas" that has a nice zoom feature.  It allows one to see exactly where Williams and Hunting 1st St SW and 5th Ave would have been located and where Iowa Midland Supply 3rd St had/has been located since 1967.  At that point in the river the flooding is ten blocks deep (ie inland) on the west bank and 5-10 blocks deep on the east bank. There is a use it at your own risk sort of statement attached to the map.  (?)

There are a no. of 2008 images of people being rescued by boat.  One shows a man climbing from a second storey window into a rescuers' boat.  It might be a nice comparison to Jessie and Dot in their canoe with the men standing by the building or the other canoe shot.  I also like the second storey rescue shot because it resonates with so many images of second and third storey rescues in New Orleans in 2005.  Alternatively, there is also the near iconic image of the Cedar Rapids 2008 flood with the six or so people in a boat on a neighborhood street with a stopsign in the foreground.  Unconnected to our story, but there are great images of the CRPublic Library under water inside and out.  These we own.

Have a good holiday,
Barbara